---
layout: post
title: 3 Interesting Things About Burma
author: Jonathan Godwin
---

### Education, Mandalay and Civil War

------

# Education

## What percentage of the Burmese population can read and write? 93%

It’s common-sense to think that literacy rates should rise in line with economic development — as people earn more and rise out of poverty one of the first things they spend money on is education.

So it’s surprising that Burma has a higher adult literacy rate than that of more economically developed countries such as Brazil, the United Arab Emirates and neighbour Cambodia. In fact, it event beats European Malta.

In fact, Burma has a long history of higher education. Before British colonial rule began at the end of the 19th century, an ancient system of monastic buddhist higher-education existed. At that time, monastic education stretched beyond the religious education it primarily is today.

During the 19th and early 20th century there were more Burmese students at UK universities at any time before and since — so much so that they even formed their own university society at Cambridge.

When the military government first came to power almost all overseas scholarships were stopped, and the policies of isolation left Burmese education removed from the rest of the world.

Hope is starting to be rekindled — in May 2013 Aung Sang Suu Kyi called for help in re-establishing higher-education in Burma.

------

# Mandalay

## In 1892, Rudyard Kipling published the famous poem ‘The Road to Mandalay’, despite never having been to the city. How old was Mandalay? 35 Years Old.

*"Mandalay, the very name evokes the splendors of the Burma of old. But, most people will be surprised to learn that Mandalay is not an old city, not even a medieval one, but rather a new city"*

Mandalay was founded on the 13th of February 1857 to fulfill a prophesy of a great buddhist metropolis being founded on the exact date of the 2400th anniversary of buddhism.
The previous capital was in Amarapura, only a few miles outside of present-day Mandalay. And indeed, this city was only a few years old itself — a massive earthquake destroyed the previous capital at Ava in 1839. Despite this, the royal court was known as the ‘Court of Ava’ until British rule started in 1885.

When the command came from King Mindon to move the capital from Amarapura to Mandalay, the entire teak palace was dismantled and reassembled. Most of the palace was destroyed by retreated Japanese during the second world war, but you can still see Kind Mindon’s bed-chamber (re-purposed as a Buddhist monastery) at the foot of Mandalay hill.

Some of the wood from the original palace at Amarapura was left behind, and the enterprising mayor built the largest teak wood-bridge in the world and named it after himself. Today U-Bein bridge is a major tourist attraction in Mandalay. If you are going to go, try to avoid sunset where you’ll struggle to find a place to sit let alone stand.

-----

# Civil War

## How many years has the civil war in Burma been going on for? 66 years

Although seemingly overwhelmingly Buddhist, Burma is actually home to a wide variety of peoples, religions and cultures. It took many years of struggle by historical Kings to unite the people under the current borders of Burma. The Burmese civil war has primarily been fought on ethnic lines, with a good dose of cold-war political divide.

Some people trace the source of the conflict to the last King of Burma’s decision not to have multiple wives. King Thibaw fell in love with only one woman — his half-sister — and refused (or was forced by his wife and mother and law) to marry anyone else. This angered the leaders of the ethnic minorities, who had traditionally married their daughters into the royal family.
Once, at the suggestion of his boyhood friend, Thibaw started sleeping with a beautiful young woman and planned to marry. It wasn’t to be — his half-sister flew into a hysterical rage and executed Thibaw’s poor friend and future wife.

Others trace the beginning of the civil war to the British. The opinion of the colonisers was that the ethnic Burmese wouldn’t make good soldiers — perhaps due to their Buddhist religion, but that the peoples in the north were similar to the Gurhkas and so would fit right in. From that point onward, the army of Burma was made up primarily of ethnic minorities — alienating a previously proudly martial group.

No doubt these factors contributed to the outbreak of insurgencies shortly after independence for Burma. The new government fought a number of insurgencies — the two main oppositions armies being the Communists and the ethnic minority Karen’s in the north.

The war can only have been exacerbated by the policy of Burmese nationalism pursued by the military dictator General Ne Win after the coup in 1962. General Ne Win believed in a Burma only for the ethnic Burmese Buddhists — forcing the then sizeable Indian population to leave the country and persecuting other minorities.

General Ne Win was a strange figure. Seemingly uninterested in anything but internal war and gold, on a visit to America he cancelled his trips to see factories in order to play golf in Hawaii.

A few years ago the Communists finally imploded, with only the ethnic battles continuing. The fighting is financially sustained for the government by giant oil reserves, and for the insurgents by an illeagal drugs trade.

It has played a huge part in the shaping of the military regime in Burma, and continues to be a large part of the national discussion. It deserves more attention from the west when trying to understand the country.

-----

Thanks to Thant Myint-U’s *River of Lost Footsteps*, from which most of content of this post was pillaged.
